Developer docs (#319)
PettingZoo-Team/PettingZoo: docs/dev_docs.md

> 

Author: done

## Example custom environment

This is a carefully commented version of the PettingZoo rps environment.

```python
from gym.spaces import Discrete
import numpy as np
from pettingzoo import AECEnv
from pettingzoo.utils import agent_selector
from pettingzoo.utils import wrappers

> # Game specific global constants can just be put in the file

Author: I just deleted it. Probably the easiest way to make it less confusing

ROCK = 0
PAPER = 1
SCISSORS = 2
NONE = 3
MOVES = ["ROCK", "PAPER", "SCISSORS", "None"]
NUM_ITERS = 100

def env():
    '''
    The env function wraps the environment in 3 wrappers by default. These
    wrappers contain logic that is common to many pettingzoo environments.
    We recomend you use at least the OrderEnforcingWrapper on your own environment
    to provide sane error message. You can

>     find full documentation for these methods elsewhere in the developer documentation.

Author: done

    '''
    env = raw_env()
    env = wrappers.CaptureStdoutWrapper(env)
    env = wrappers.AssertOutOfBoundsWrapper(env)
    env = wrappers.OrderEnforcingWrapper(env)
    return env

class raw_env(AECEnv):
    '''
    The metadata holds environment constants. From gym, we inherit the "render.modes",
    metadata which specifies which modes can be put into the render() method.
    At least human mode should be supported.
    The "name"  metadata allows the environment to be pretty printed.
    '''
    metadata = {'render.modes': ['human'], "name": "rps_v1"}

    def __init__(self):
        '''
        The init method takes in environment arguments and
         should define the following attributes:
        - possible_agents
        - action_spaces
        - observation_spaces

        These attributes should not be changed after initialization.
        '''
        self.possible_agents = ["player_" + str(r) for r in range(2)]
        self.agent_name_mapping = dict(zip(self.possible_agents, list(range(len(self.possible_agents)))))

>         self.action_spaces = {agent: Discrete(3) for agent in self.possible_agents}

Author: done

        self.observation_spaces = {agent: Discrete(4) for agent in self.possible_agents}

>         self.display_wait = 0.0

Author: removed

        else:
            string = "Game over"
        print(string)

    def observe(self, agent):
        '''
        Observe should return the observation of the specified agent. This function
        should return a sane observation (though not necessarily the most up to date possible)
        at any time after reset() is called.
        '''
        # observation of one agent is the previous state of the other
        return np.array(self.observations[agent])

    def close(self):
        '''
        Close should release any graphical displays, subprocesses, network connections
        or any other environment data which should  not be kept around after the
        user is no longer using the environment.
        '''
        pass

    def reset(self):
        '''
        Reset needs to initialize the following attributes
        - agents
        - rewards
        - _cumulative_rewards
        - dones
        - infos
        - agent_selection
        And must set up the environment so that render(), step(), and observe()
        can be called without issues.

        Here it sets up the state dictionary

>         which is used by step() and the observations dictionary which is used by step()

Author: done

        and observe()
        '''
        self.agents = self.possible_agents[:]
        self.rewards = {agent: 0 for agent in self.agents}
        self._cumulative_rewards = {agent: 0 for agent in self.agents}
        self.dones = {agent: False for agent in self.agents}
        self.infos = {agent: {} for agent in self.agents}
        self.state = {agent: NONE for agent in self.agents}
        self.observations = {agent: NONE for agent in self.agents}
        self.num_moves = 0
        '''
        Our agent_selector utility allows easy cyclic stepping through the agents list.
        '''
        self._agent_selector = agent_selector(self.agents)
        self.agent_selection = self._agent_selector.next()

    def step(self, action):
        '''
        step(action) takes in an action for the current agent (specified by
        agent_selection) and needs to update
        - rewards
        - _cumulative_rewards (accumulating the rewards)
        - dones
        - infos
        - agent_selection (to the next agent)
        And any internal state used by observe() or render()
        '''
        if self.dones[self.agent_selection]:

>             # handles stepping an agent which is done

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # handles stepping an agent which is already done
```

>             # takes in the None action, and moved agent_selection to the next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # performs the None action for the done agent, and moves agent_selection to the next
```

>             # done agent or if there are no more done agents, to the next live agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # done agent, or if there are no more done agents, to the next live agent
```

            return self._was_done_step(action)

        agent = self.agent_selection

        # the agent which stepped last had its _cumulative_rewards accounted for
        # (because it was returned by last()), so the _cumulative_rewards for this
        # agent should start again at 0
        self._cumulative_rewards[agent] = 0

        # stores action of current agent
        self.state[self.agent_selection] = action

        # collect reward if it is the last agent to act
        if self._agent_selector.is_last():
            # rewards for all agents are placed in the .rewards dictionary
            self.rewards[self.agents[0]], self.rewards[self.agents[1]] = {
                (ROCK, ROCK): (0, 0),
                (ROCK, PAPER): (-1, 1),
                (ROCK, SCISSORS): (1, -1),
                (PAPER, ROCK): (1, -1),
                (PAPER, PAPER): (0, 0),
                (PAPER, SCISSORS): (-1, 1),
                (SCISSORS, ROCK): (-1, 1),
                (SCISSORS, PAPER): (1, -1),
                (SCISSORS, SCISSORS): (0, 0),

>             }[(self.state[self.agents[0]], self.state[self.agents[1]])]

Reviewer: Purely for the code quality of RPS, this dict could be defined at the top of the file

            self.num_moves += 1
            # The dones dictionary must be updated for all players.
            self.dones = {agent: self.num_moves >= NUM_ITERS for agent in self.agents}

            # observe the current state
            for i in self.agents:
                self.observations[i] = self.state[self.agents[1 - self.agent_name_mapping[i]]]
        else:
            # necessary so that observe() returns a reasonable observation at all times.
            self.state[self.agents[1 - self.agent_name_mapping[agent]]] = NONE

>             # no rewards are allocated until both players give ann action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # no rewards are allocated until both players give an action
```

            self._clear_rewards()

        # selects the next agent.
        self.agent_selection = self._agent_selector.next()
        # Adds .rewards to ._cumulative_rewards
        self._accumulate_rewards()

```

> ## Example custom Parallel Environment

Reviewer: All comments made above should be fixed for the parallel documentation as well

        self.observation_spaces = {agent: Discrete(4) for agent in self.possible_agents}

        self.display_wait = 0.0

    def render(self, mode="human"):
        '''
        Renders the environment. In human mode, it can print to terminal, open
        up a graphical window, or open up some other way a human can see and understand.
        '''
        if len(self.agents) == 2:
            string = ("Current state: Agent1: {} , Agent2: {}".format(MOVES[self.state[self.agents[0]]], MOVES[self.state[self.agents[1]]]))
        else:
            string = "Game over"
        print(string)

    def close(self):
        '''
        Close should release any graphical displays, subprocesses, network connections
        or any other environment data which should  not be kept around after the
        user is no longer using the environment.
        '''
        pass

    def reset(self):
        '''
        Reset needs to initialize the `agents` attribute
        And must set up the environment so that render(), and step()
        can be called without issues.

        Here it initializes the `num_moves` variable which counts the number of

>         hands are played.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        hands that are played.
```

        Returns the observations for each agent
        '''
        self.agents = self.possible_agents[:]
        self.num_moves = 0
        observations = {agent: NONE for agent in self.agents}
        return observations

    def step(self, actions):
        '''
        step(action) takes in an action for each agent and should return the
        - observations
        - rewards
        - dones
        - infos
        dicts where each dict looks like {agent_1: item_1, agent_2: item_2}
        '''

>         # rewards for all agents are placed in the rewards dictionary to be ret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # rewards for all agents are placed in the rewards dictionary to be returned
```

        rewards = {}
        rewards[self.agents[0]], rewards[self.agents[1]] = {
            (ROCK, ROCK): (0, 0),
            (ROCK, PAPER): (-1, 1),
            (ROCK, SCISSORS): (1, -1),
            (PAPER, ROCK): (1, -1),
            (PAPER, PAPER): (0, 0),
            (PAPER, SCISSORS): (-1, 1),
            (SCISSORS, ROCK): (-1, 1),
            (SCISSORS, PAPER): (1, -1),
            (SCISSORS, SCISSORS): (0, 0),
        }[(actions[self.agents[0]], actions[self.agents[1]])]

        self.num_moves += 1
        env_done = self.num_moves >= NUM_ITERS
        dones = {agent: env_done for agent in self.agents}

        # current observation is just the other player's most recent action
        observations = {self.agents[i]: int(actions[self.agents[1 - i]]) for i in range(len(self.agents))}

        # typically there won't be any information in the infos, but there must
        # still be an entry for each agent
        infos = {agent: {} for agent in self.agents}

        return observations, rewards, dones, infos

```

## Wrappers

> A wrapper is a environment transformation which takes in an environment as input, and outputs a new environment which is similar to the inputted environment but some transformation or validation applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A wrapper is an environment transformation that takes in an environment as input, and outputs a new environment that is similar to the input environment, but with some transformation or validation applied to it.
```

### Conversion wrappers

As we provide both the AEC API and the Parallel API, we also provide wrappers to convert back and forth between the two APIs.

#### AEC to Parallel

An environment can be converted from an AEC environment to a parallel environment with the `to_parallel` wrapper shown below. Note that this wrapper makes the following assumptions about the underlying environment:

1. The environment steps in a cycle, i.e. it steps through every live agent in order.
2. The environment does not update the observations of the agents except at the end of a cycle.

> Note that it also changes when rewards are allocated to agents. All rewards are given at the end of each cycle, which is slightly different than in the AEC model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this also changes when rewards are allocated to agents. All rewards are given at the end of each cycle, which is slightly different than in the AEC model.
```
Maybe extremely briefly say what the difference is between this and the AEC model is, if possible. "Note that this also changes when rewards are given compared to the AEC API. The parallel API gives all rewards at the end of each cycle, while the AEC model give rewards..."

Author: done

```
from pettingzoo.utils import to_parallel
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v3
env = pistonball_v3.env()
env = to_parallel(env)
```

#### Parallel to AEC

Any parallel environment can be efficiently converted to an AEC environment with the `from_parallel` wrapper.

```
from pettingzoo.utils import from_parallel
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v3
env = pistonball_v3.parallel_env()
env = from_parallel(env)
```

### Utility wrappers

We wanted our pettingzoo environments to be both easy to use and easy to implement. To combine these, we have a set of simple wrappers which provide input validation and other convenient reusable logic.

> * `BaseWrapper`: all AECEnv wrappers should inherit from this base class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `BaseWrapper`: All AECEnv wrappers should inherit from this base class
```

> * `TerminateIllegalWrapper`: which handles illegal move logic for classic games

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `TerminateIllegalWrapper`: Handles illegal move logic for classic games
```

> * `CaptureStdoutWrapper`: which takes an environment which prints to terminal, and gives it an `ansi` render mode where it captures the terminal output and returns it as a string instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `CaptureStdoutWrapper`: Takes an environment which prints to terminal, and gives it an `ansi` render mode where it captures the terminal output and returns it as a string instead.
```

* `AssertOutOfBoundsWrapper`: Asserts if the action given to step is outside of the action space. Applied in PettingZoo environments with discrete action spaces.
* `ClipOutOfBoundsWrapper`: Clips the input action to fit in the continuous action space (emitting a warning if it does so). Applied to continuous environments in pettingzoo.

> * `OrderEnforcingWrapper`: Gives a sensible error message if function calls or attribute access are in a disallowed order, for example if step() is called before reset(), or .dones attribute is accessed before reset(), or if seed() and then step() is called before reset() is called again (reset must be called after seed()). Applied to all PettingZoo environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `OrderEnforcingWrapper`: Gives a sensible error message if function calls or attribute access are in a disallowed order, for example if step() is called before reset(), or the .dones attribute is accessed before reset(), or if seed() is called and then step() is used before reset() is called again (reset must be called after seed()). Applied to all PettingZoo environments.
```

> All of the above can be applied to your environment with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any of the above wrappers can be applied to your environment in the same way as the example below:
```
Is this trying to say that these specific 5 wrappers will be applied with the below code, or that you can apply anyone of these by following the example below?

Author: fixed

```
from pettingzoo.utils import OrderEnforcingWrapper
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v3
env = pistonball_v3.env()
env = OrderEnforcingWrapper(env)
```

## Developer Utils

The utils directory contains a few functions which are helpful for debugging environments. These are documented in the API docs.

The utils directory also contain some classes which are only helpful for developing new environments. These are documented below.

### Agent selector

> The `agent_selector` class steps in a cycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `agent_selector` class steps through agents in a cycle.
```

It can be used as follows to cycle through the list of agents:

```python
from pettingzoo.utils import agent_selector
agents = ["agent_1", "agent_2", "agent_3"]
selector = agent_selector(agents)
agent_selection = selector.reset()
# agent_selection will be "agent_1"
for i in range(100):
    agent_selection = selector.next()

>     # will select "agent_2, agent_3, agent_1, agent_2, agent_3, ..."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # will select "agent_2", "agent_3", "agent_1", "agent_2", "agent_3", ...
```

```

> ### Depreciated Module

Reviewer: Is this supposed to be called Depreciated or Deprecated?

> The DepreciatedModule is used in PettingZoo to help guide the user away from old obsolete environment versions and to new ones. If you wish to create a similar versioning system, this may be helfpul.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DepreciatedModule is used in PettingZoo to help guide the user away from old obsolete environment versions and toward new ones. If you wish to create a similar versioning system, this may be helpful.
```

For example, when the user tries to import the `prospector_v0` environment, they import the following variable (defined in `pettingzoo/butterfly/__init__.py`):
```
from pettingzoo.utils.depreciated_module import DepreciatedModule
prospector_v0 = DepreciatedModule("prospector", "v0", "v3")
```
This declaration tells the user that `prospector_v0` is depreciated and `prospector_v3` should be used instead. In particular, it gives the following error:
```
from pettingzoo.butterfly import prospector_v0
prospector_v0.env()
# pettingzoo.utils.depreciated_module.DeprecatedEnv: prospector_v0 is now depreciated, use prospector_v3 instead
```

## Tests

> PettingZoo has a number of tests which it puts environments through. If you are adding a new environment, we encourage you to run these tests on your own environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PettingZoo has a number of tests for environments. If you are adding a new environment, we encourage you to run these tests on your own environment.
```

### API test

PettingZoo's API has a number of features and requirements. To make sure your environment is consistent with the API, we have the api_test. Below is an example:

```
from pettingzoo.test import api_test
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v3
env = pistonball_v3.env()
api_test(env, num_cycles=10, verbose_progress=False)
```

As you can tell, you simply pass an environment to the test. The test will assert or give some other error on an API issue, and will return normally if it passes.

The optional arguments are:

*  `num_cycles`: runs the environment for that many cycles and checks that the output is consistent with the API.
* `verbose_progress`: Prints out messages to indicate partial completion of the test. Useful for debugging environments.

> ### Parallel Play test

Reviewer: Shouldn't it just be called Parallel API Test?

Author: done

from pettingzoo.test import seed_test
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v3
env_fn = pistonball_v3.env
seed_test(env_fn, num_cycles=10)
```

> The optional argument, `num_cycles`, indicates how long the environment will be run for to check determinism. Some environments only fail the test long after initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optional argument, `num_cycles`, indicates how long the environment will be run to check for determinism. Some environments only fail the test long after initialization.
```

### Max Cycles Test

> The max cycles test tests that the `max_cycles` environment argument exists and the resulting environment actually runs for the correct number of cycles. If your environment does not take a `max_cycles` argument, you should not run this test. The reason this test exists is that there are a lot of one-off differences possible when implementing `max_cycles`. An example test usage looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The max cycles test tests that the `max_cycles` environment argument exists and the resulting environment actually runs for the correct number of cycles. If your environment does not take a `max_cycles` argument, you should not run this test. The reason this test exists is that many off-by-one errors are possible when implementing `max_cycles`. An example test usage looks like:
```

```
from pettingzoo.test import max_cycles_test
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v3
env = pistonball_v3.env()
max_cycles_test(env)
```

### Render test

> The render test checks that rendering 1) does not crash and 2) gives output of the correct type given a mode. The render test supports testing `'human'`, `'ansi'`, and `'rgb_array'` modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The render test checks that rendering 1) does not crash and 2) produces output of the correct type when given a mode. The render test supports testing `'human'`, `'ansi'`, and `'rgb_array'` modes.
```

```
from pettingzoo.test import render_test
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v3
env = pistonball_v3.env()
render_test(env)
```

### Performance benchmark test

> To make sure we do not have performance regressions, we have the performance benchmark test. This test simply prints out the number of steps and cycles that the environment takes in 5 seconds. This test needs manual inspection to use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make sure we do not have performance regressions, we have the performance benchmark test. This test simply prints out the number of steps and cycles that the environment takes in 5 seconds. This test requires manual inspection of its outputs:
```
